Welcome back! One of the advantages
to programming in Python is that
it's a very readable language.
It also helps that the Python community
shares a set of guidelines that
promote clean and neat code.
These are called style guides.
A style guide is a manual
that informs the writing,
formatting, and design of documents.
As it relates to programming,
style guides are intended to help
programmers follow similar conventions.
The PEP 8 style guide is a resource
that provides stylistic guidelines for
programmers working in Python.
PEP is short for
Python Enhancement Proposals.
PEP 8 provides programmers with
suggestions related to syntax.
They're not mandatory, but
they help create consistency
among programmers to make sure that
others can easily understand our code.
It's essentially based on
the principle that code
is read much more often than it's written.
This is a great resource for
anyone who wants to learn how to style and
format their Python code in a manner
consistent with other programmers.
For example, PEP 8 discusses comments.
A comment is a note programmers make
about the intention behind their code.
They are inserted in computer programs to
indicate what the code is doing and why.
PEP 8 gives specific recommendations,
like making your comments clear
and keeping them up-to-date
when the code changes.
Here's an example of
code without a comment.
The person who wrote it might
know what's going on, but
what about others who need to read it?
They might not understand the context
behind the failed-attempts variable and
why it prints "Account locked"
if it's greater than 5.
And the original writer might need to
revisit this code in the future, for
example, to debug the larger program.
Without the comment,
they would also be less efficient.
But in this example we've added a comment.
All the readers can quickly
understand what our program and
its variables are doing.
Comments should be short and
right to the point.
Next, let's talk about another important
aspect of code readability: indentation.
Indentation is a space added at
the beginning of a line of code.
This both improves readability and
ensures that code is executed properly.
There are instances when you
must indent lines of code to
establish connections
with other lines of code.
This groups the indented
lines of code together and
establishes a connection with a previous
line of code that isn't indented.
The body of a conditional
statement is one example of this.
We need to make sure this printed
statement executes only when the condition
is met. Indenting here provides
this instruction to Python.
If the printed statement were not
indented, Python would execute this
printed statement outside of
the conditional and it would always print.
This would be problematic because
you would get a message that updates
are needed,
even if they're not. To indent,
you must add at least one
space before a line of code.
Typically, programmers are two to four
spaces for visual clarity.
The PEP 8 style guide
recommends four spaces.
At my first engineering job,
I wrote a script to help validate and
launch firewall rules.
Initially, my script worked well, but
it became hard to read a year later when
we were trying to expand its functionality.
My programming knowledge and
coding style had evolved over that year, as
had the coding practices of my teammates.
Our organization did not use a coding
style guide at that time, so
our codes were very different,
hard to read, and did not scale well.
This caused a lot of challenges and
required additional work to fix.
Ensuring that code is readable and
can be modified over time is why
it's important for security professionals
to adhere to coding style guides
and why style guides are so
important for organizations to utilize.
The ability to write readable code
is key when working in Python.
As we head into the next
part of our course,
we'll continue to develop effective
code practices for better readability.